# Understanding the generated code

Understand what code is generated by `protoc-gen-grpc-swift-2` from a `.proto`
file and how to use it.

## Overview

The gRPC Swift Protobuf package provides a plugin to the Protocol Buffers
Compiler (`protoc`) called `protoc-gen-grpc-swift-2`. The plugin is responsible
for generating the gRPC specific code for services defined in a `.proto` file.

### Package namespace

Most `.proto` files contain a `package` directive near the start of the file
describing the namespace it belongs to. Here's an example:

```proto
package foo.bar.v1;
```

The package name "foo.bar.v1" is important as it is used as a prefix for
generated types. The default behaviour is to replace periods with underscores
and to capitalize each word and add a trailing underscore. For this package the
prefix is "Foo\_Bar\_V1\_". If you don't declare a package then the prefix will be
the empty string.

You can override the prefix by setting the `swift_prefix` option:

```proto
option swift_prefix = "FooBarV1";

package foo.bar.v1;
```

The prefix for types in this file would be "FooBarV1" instead of "Foo\_Bar\_V1\_".

### Service namespace

For each service declared in your `.proto` file, gRPC will generate a caseless
`enum` which is a namespace holding the generated protocols and types. The name
of this `enum` is `{PREFIX}{SERVICE}` where `{PREFIX}` is as described in the
previous section and `{SERVICE}` is the name of the service as declared in the
`.proto` file.

As an example the following definition creates a service namespace `enum` called
`Foo_Bar_V1_BazService` (the `{PREFIX}` is "Foo_Bar_V1_" and `{SERVICE}` is
"BazService"):

```proto
package foo.bar.v1;

service BazService {
  // ...
}
```

Code generated for each service falls into three categories:

1. Service metadata,
2. Service code, and
3. Client code.

#### Service metadata

gRPC generates metadata for each service including a descriptor identifying the
fully qualified name of the service and information about each method in the
service. You likely won't need to interact directly with this information but
it's available should you need to.

#### Service code

Within a service namespace gRPC generates three service protocols:

1. `StreamingServiceProtocol`,
2. `ServiceProtocol`, and
3. `SimpleServiceProtocol`.

The full name of each protocol includes the service namespace.

> Example:
>
> For the `BazService` in the `foo.bar.v1` package the protocols would be:
>
> - `Foo_Bar_V1_BazService.StreamingServiceProtocol`,
> - `Foo_Bar_V1_BazService.ServiceProtocol`, and
> - `Foo_Bar_V1_BazService.SimpleServiceProtocol`.

Each of these protocols mirror the `service` defined in your `.proto` file with
one requirement per RPC. To implement your service you must implement one of
these protocols.

The protocols form a hierarchy with `StreamingServiceProtocol` at the bottom and
`SimpleServiceProtocol` at the top. `ServiceProtocol` refines
`StreamingServiceProtocol`, and `SimpleServiceProtocol` refines
`ServiceProtocol` (and `StreamingServiceProtocol` in turn).

The `StreamingServiceProtocol` implements each RPC as if it were a bidirectional
streaming RPC. This gives you the most flexibility at the cost of a harder to
implement API. It also puts the responsibility on you to ensure that each RPC
sends and receives the correct number of messages.

The `ServiceProtocol` enforces that the correct number of messages are sent and
received via its API. It also allows you to read request metadata and send both
initial and trailing metadata. The request and response types for these
requirements are in terms of `ServerRequest` and `ServerResponse`.

The `SimpleServiceProtocol` also enforces the correct number of messages are
sent and received via its API. However, it isn't defined in terms of
`ServerRequest` or `ServerResponse` so it doesn't allow you access metadata.
This limitation allows it to have the simplest API and is preferred if you don't
need access to metadata.

| Protocol                   | Enforces number of messages | Access to metadata
|----------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------
| `StreamingServiceProtocol` | ✗                           | ✓
| `ServiceProtocol`          | ✓                           | ✓
| `SimpleServiceProtocol`    | ✓                           | ✗

#### Client code

gRPC generates two types for the client within a service namespace:

1. `ClientProtocol`, and
2. `Client`.

Like the service code, the full name includes the namespace.

> Example:
>
> For the `BazService` in the `foo.bar.v1` package the client types would be:
>
> - `Foo_Bar_V1_BazService.ClientProtocol`, and
> - `Foo_Bar_V1_BazService.Client`.

The `ClientProtocol` defines one requirement for each RPC in terms of
`ClientRequest` and `ClientResponse`. You don't need to implement the protocol
as `Client` provides a concrete implementation.

gRPC also generates extensions on `ClientProtocol` to provide more ergonomic
APIs. These include versions which provide default arguments for various
parameters (like the message serializer and deserializers; call options and
response handler) and versions which don't use `ClientRequest` and
`ClientResponse` directly.
